Add EIP-6046: Replace SELFDESTRUCT with DEACTIVATE (#6046)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-6046.md

---
eip: 6046
title: Replace SELFDESTRUCT with DEACTIVATE
description: Change SELFDESTRUCT to not delete storage keys and use a special value in the account nonce to signal deactivation
author: Alex Beregszaszi (@axic)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/almost-self-destructing-selfdestruct-deactivate/11886
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2022-11-25
requires: 2681
---

## Abstract

> Change `SELFDESTRUCT` to not delete all storage keys, and to use a special value in the account nonce to signal *decativated* accounts. Because the semantics of revival change (storage keys may exists), we also rename the instruction to `DEACTIVATE`.

Author: Can you clarify?

> Change `SELFDESTRUCT` to not delete all storage keys, and to use a special value in the account nonce to signal *decativated* accounts. Because the semantics of revival change (storage keys may exists), we also rename the instruction to `DEACTIVATE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP renames `SELFDESTRUCT` to `DEACTIVATE`. In addition, this EIP changes `SELFDESTRUCT`/`DEACTIVATE` such that storage keys are not deleted, and a special account nonce is set to signal *decativated* accounts.
```

> Change `SELFDESTRUCT` to not delete all storage keys, and to use a special value in the account nonce to signal *decativated* accounts. Because the semantics of revival change (storage keys may exists), we also rename the instruction to `DEACTIVATE`.

Author: I think this presents the proposal in a different shape than it is. Renaming the instruction is an unimportant part.

> Change `SELFDESTRUCT` to not delete all storage keys, and to use a special value in the account nonce to signal *decativated* accounts. Because the semantics of revival change (storage keys may exists), we also rename the instruction to `DEACTIVATE`.

Reviewer: Fair enough.

## Motivation

> The `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction currently has a fixed price, but is unbounded in terms of how many storage/account changes it performs (it needs to delete all keys). This is an outstanding concern for long.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction currently has a fixed price but has no bounds to the number of storage/account changes it performs (it needs to delete all keys). This has long been a concern.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction currently has a fixed price, but is unbounded in terms of how many storage/account changes it performs (it needs to delete all keys). This has been an outstanding concern for some time.
```

> Furthermore with *Verkle trees* accounts will be organised differently: account properties, including storage, will have individual keys, and it will not be possible to traverse and find all used keys. This makes `SELFDESTRUCT` very challenging to support in Verkle trees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, with *Verkle trees*, accounts will be organized differently: account properties, including storage, will have individual keys. It will not be possible to traverse and find all used keys. `SELFDESTRUCT` is challenging to support while using Verkle trees.
```

Author: Updated.

## Specification

> 

Reviewer: Do you want to use RFC 2119 / RFC 8174?

Author: Perhaps in a later iteration if needed. Currently it seems to be extra work without much benefit.

> 

Reviewer: This should define the block number on which the upgrade occurs.

Author: This practice has long been gone, because block numbers are decided outside of the specifications. Furthermore, upgrades may not even be rolled out at pre-defined block numbers anymore.

Reviewer: Not sure what the policy is on this anymore. I'll resolve this.

> 1. Change the rules introduced by [EIP-2681](./eip-2681.md) such that regular nonce increase is bound by `2^64-2` instead of `2^64-1`. This applies from genesis.

Reviewer: This needs more detail.

Author: What exactly? Are you suggesting to duplicate the content of EIP-2681 here?

Reviewer: I meant to say this needs to be more formally specified. Right now, "bounded" is unclear. Here's my interpretation of it:
```suggestion
1. If an account's nonce (defined in [EIP-2681](./eip-2681.md)) would be set to a number greater than `2^64-2`, it is set to `2^64-1` instead.
```
"It applies from genesis" is also unclear to me (do you mean starting from when this EIP is activated?), although that is probably a lack of knowledge on my part.

Author: EIP-2681 *applies from genesis*, where genesis means block 0/1. It is not introduced on a specific later block.

Here we state that we change the maximum value defined by EIP-2681.

> 2. The behaviour of `SELFDESTRUCT` is changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The behavior of `SELFDESTRUCT` is changed such that:
```
I believe that we use the American spelling of behavior/behaviour.

Author: I have seen no rule that American spelling must be obeyed in EIPs.

Reviewer: Fair enough.
```suggestion
2. The behaviour of `SELFDESTRUCT` is changed such that:
```

Author: Updated.

>   - Do not delete any storage keys and also leave the account in place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` does not delete any storage keys 
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` does not change any account properties other than its balance
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` marks the account as warm
```

Author: I think it is a bit excessive to reiterate all prior rules (as they are complex), but instead left a note regarding EIP-2929.

>   - Do not give a refund.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` does not give a gas refund
```

>   - Do not give a refund.

Reviewer 2: `SELFDESTRUCT` refunds were already removed in London by EIP-3529.

Author: Ah right, so many various changes around refunds. Will make this EIP depend on that for simplicity. Thanks!

Author: Added.

>   - Transfer all value and set account balance to `0.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` transfers all `msg.value` and account balance.
```

Author: You know that `msg.value` is a construct of Solidity only?

Reviewer: What value are you referring to, then?

Author: Clarified.

>   - Set the account nonce to `2^64-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELFDESTRUCT` sets the account nonce to `2^64-1`.
```

Author: I think repeated the instruction name on each line is a bit excessive.

>   - Set the account nonce to `2^64-1`.

Reviewer 3: With this change, the deactivation happens immediately instead of at the end of the transaction.  This could possibly break backwards compatibility in a case where a contract is written to selfdestruct and then be called before the transaction ends.

Author: Wording can be changed to apply this step at the end of the transaction, where deletion would take place. Can you please comment this on the discussion url? The PR discussions supposed to be ephemeral.

> 2. Modify account execution (triggered both via external transactions or CALL*), such that execution succeeds and returns an empty buffer if the nonce equals `2^64-1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Modify account execution (triggered both via external transactions or `CALL*` opcodes), such that execution succeeds and returns an empty buffer if the nonce equals `2^64-1`.
```

  - Note that the account can still receive non-executable value transfers (such as coinbase transactions or other `SELFDESTRUCT`s).

3. Modify `CREATE2` such that it allows account creation if the nonce equals `2^64-1`.

>   - Note that a successful `CREATE2` will change the account code, nonce and potentially balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Note that a successful `CREATE2` will change the account code, nonce, and potentially balance.
  - Note that the initial storage might not be empty.
```

Author: Updated.

> 4. Rename the `SELFDESTRUCT` instruction to `DEACTIVATE`, because the semantics of "account revival" are changed: the old storage items will remain, and newly deployed code must be aware of this.

Reviewer: This should be the first item.

Author: Why?

Reviewer: It's odd to refer to something one way, and at the end rename it.

## Rationale

> There have been various proposals of removing `SELFDESTRUCT` and many would just outright remove the deletion capability. This breaks certain usage patterns, which the *deactivation* option leaves intact, albeit with minor changes. This only affects *newly* deployed code, and not existing one.

Reviewer: > There have been various proposals of removing `SELFDESTRUCT`

Might be worth listing a few.

Author: Supposedly we cannot link to external resources, so why bother making up a weird list without links?

Reviewer: You can refer to other EIPs.

Author: A number of the previous attempts were not merged as EIPs, only exists as PRs. They can't be linked.

Author: *Basically pointing out how bad our EIP-1 system is.*

Reviewer: Final EIPs can link to non-final EIPs. They just can't do so in the normative sections. The rationale section is non-normative.

> All the proposals would leave data in the state, but at least this one has the potential to have that data reusable/removable one-by-one should the revived contract choose to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the proposals would leave data in the state, but this proposal has the flexibility to individually reuse or remove storage slots one-by-one should the revived contract choose to do so.
```

Author: Updated.

## Backwards Compatibility

This EIP requires a protocol upgrade, since it modifies consensus rules. The further restriction of nonce should not have an effect on accounts, as `2^64-2` is an unfeasibly high limit.

Contracts using the revival pattern will still work, but the code deployed during revival may need to be made aware that storage keys can already exist in the account.

## Security Considerations

> The authors are not currently aware of new risks.

Reviewer 2: The new behaviour of preserving storage has potential security ramifications. In particular, there could be unexpected behaviour when code written based on the old semantics is executed under the new semantics. This could be a problem because fully autonomous destruction and revival by smart contract is has been deployed on Mainnet.

I think this deserves a mention in the Security Considerations section.

Author: Made an updated version:
```suggestion
The new behaviour of preserving storage has a potential effect on security. Contract authors must be aware and design contracts accordingly. There may be an effect on existing deployed code performing autonomous destruction and revival.
```

Feel free to make a suggestion for a better version.

> This could be a problem because fully autonomous destruction and revival by smart contract is has been deployed on Mainnet.

Could you link to such a contract please?
